.. _structure:

==================
Software Structure
==================

Overview
========

Sunbeam is a snakemake pipeline with a python library acting as a wrapper (``sunbeamlib``). 
Calling ``sunbeam run [args] [options]`` is a call to this wrapper library 
which then invokes the necessary snakemake commands. The main Snakefile can be 
found in the root directory and it makes use of rules from ``rules/`` and 
``extensions/``, scripts from ``scripts/``, and environments from ``envs/``. Tests 
are managed by a script ``tests/run_tests.bash`` which collects test 
functions from ``tests/test_suite.bash``. Documentation lives in ``docs/`` and is 
served by ReadTheDocs.

.. tip::
    
    Some of these sections won't exist if you install via tar.

Sections
========

sunbeam/ (root directory)
-------------------------

The root sunbeam directory holds a few important files including 
``environment.yml``, ``setup.py``, and ``Snakefile``. The environment file defines 
the dependencies required to run sunbeam and is used to create the main sunbeam 
environment. The setup file defines the structure and dependencies of the 
sunbeamlib_ and makes it installable via pip. The snakefile manages all of the 
snakemake components of the pipeline.

There are also bash scripts for installing sunbeam and managing sunbeam's version 
called ``install.sh`` and ``manage-version.sh``. These each have their own doc pages.

.. tip::

    ``environment.yml`` defines the main sunbeam environment that you activate in 
    order to run the pipeline. Internally, sunbeam then manages a number of 
    other environments (defined in envs_) on a per-rule basis.

docs/
-----

Each page of the sunbeam documentation is here in the form of a ``.rst`` file. 
The additional files are all involved in the setup and deployment of the docs 
to ReadTheDocs using Sphinx. Most of these are autogenerated by Sphinx. The one 
bit of trickiness comes from importing the version of sunbeam into the docs 
build. This is done in ``conf.py`` by adding the sunbeam root to ``sys.path`` and 
then importing ``sunbeamlib`` which stores the version tag in a ``__version__`` 
variable using ``semantic_version``.

.. _envs:
envs/
-----

This directory contains ``.yml`` files defining environments that will be managed 
by snakemake as it runs. Anywhere that a rule is defined with 
``conda: /path/to/ENV_NAME.yml``, when snakemake reaches that rule, that 
environment will be created if it doesn't exist already and then activated 
while running the rule. These environments are created in ``sunbeam/.snakemake/`` 
by default.

extensions/
-----------

This directory will contain any extensions you install with ``sunbeam extend`` or 
any extensions that you develop as well as a ``.placeholder`` file that is just 
there to make sure the directory always exists. Any extensions should be in 
their own directories that start with ``sbx_``.

rules/
------

This directory contains all of the snakemake rules that get imported by the 
main ``Snakefile``. The rules are organized into subdirectories by function and 
each subdirectory has an associated environment to run its rules in ``envs/``.

scripts/
--------

This directory contains any python code that needs to be executed by snakemake 
rules. Again they are organized into subdirectories to match function and each 
is named according to the rule that calls it.

.. _sunbeamlib:
sunbeamlib/
-----------

This directory contains the python library that acts as a wrapper for 
snakemake. The python files in the root contain a number of utility functions 
whiles those in ``scripts/`` define the commands for sunbeam. 
``scripts/command.py`` takes in ``sunbeam [cmd]`` and then routes it to the file 
matching the given command. The ``data/`` directory contains the default config 
file as well as some sample config templates for running on a cluster. It also 
contains the default profile template and one for slurm.

tests/
------

This directory contains all of the testing framework and tests for sunbeam. The 
framework is written mostly in bash with ``test_suite.bash`` holding the main 
test suite and ``run_tests.bash`` to run it. The first step in running the tests 
is to create dummy data which is generated using ``generate_dummy_data.py`` and 
any installed extensions are then moved temporarily to the ``extensions/`` 
subdirectory to avoid any interference from them (extensions should each be 
tested separately from sunbeam). Some tests will end by calling 
``find_targets.py`` to check that all of the files specified in ``targets.txt`` or 
``targets_singleend.txt`` are present. Unit tests for the ``scripts/`` directory 
live in ``unit_tests/`` subdirectory. Other subdirectories are auxiliary fixtures 
for running certain tests.

Hidden Directories
------------------

.circleci/
**********

This directory contains the ``config.yml`` file which defines the CI jobs to be 
run by CircleCI as well as any scripts that are included in those jobs.

.github/
********

This directory contains the ``PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md`` file which defines a 
template for any pull requests on the sunbeam repository. It is also where 
the SuperLinter CI job definition lives.

.snakemake/
***********

This directory is created the first time you run sunbeam. It will contain all 
the auxiliary environments created by snakemake (each environment will be named 
by a hash of the ``.yml`` file, so any changes to those files will result in a 
new environment being built). It also includes things like logs of previous runs 
and singularity images/builds if you use singularity.